Rafa in southern Gaza the last refuge
for 1.5 million Palestinians Sheltering
in fear of an Israeli ground Invasion
the US and European allies are all
opposed so will Israel push ahead
regardless what will be the consequences
this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello again I'm James Bay rarely is
their Unity among Israel's opponents and
allies but that's the case regarding
opposition to prime minister Benjamin
netanyahu's plans to invade the city of
Rafa in Gaza after more than 6 months of
brutal War 1.5 million people are living
in dire conditions at the southern end
of the strip most have been forced there
by Israeli attacks which continue on
what's meant to be a place of Refuge yet
despite worldwide opposition from
Israel's allies its opponents and the
United Nations Netanyahu says the battle
plans for a major ground defensive in
Rafa have been drawn up with a date
already set so will he go ahead what
will be the political implications of
Israel going against the advice of the
US its main backer and supplier of
weapons and for Palestinians could this
be the worst scenario yet a looming
catastrophe after a catalog of horror
we'll discuss all of this with our panel
of guests in a moment but first this
report from Finton Monahan
most of gaza's population is crammed
into the southern city of
Rafa they live under constant Israeli
bombardment the latest waves of attacks
have killed dozens of people but as the
Israeli Army prepares for a major ground
offensive many fear things are about to
get a lot
worse we are definitely terrified
whoever say he isn't afraid is lying
there is nowhere for us to
go we are scared if an invasion takes
place in Rafa where can we go we are
more than 20 people I really dream about
going back to my home I wish I can go
back to my apartment even if it is
Rubble now Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu says an attack on
Rafa is essential to achieve his War aim
of destroying Hamas he says nothing will
prevent it from going
ahead we will complete the elimination
of the Hamas battalions including in
Rafa there is no force in the world that
will stop us
but 1.5 million displaced Palestinians
are taking Refuge there they have
nowhere else to go and the UN is warning
that a ground assault would result in
major civilian casualties a ground
intervention in Gaza in Rafa with the
characteristics that we all know would
be a humanitarian catastrophe and so I
believe this is time to make sure that
what we have been said saying since the
beginning a humanitarian ceasefire takes
place even the US Israel's stest Ally
has urged it not to go ahead with the
offensive in the first instance it's
imperative that people uh are able to
get out of the way of uh uh of any
conflict uh and doing that getting
people out of Harm's Way is a Monumental
task uh for which we've yet to see a
plan and not only getting them out of
Harm's Way making sure that they can be
supported with Arian assistance the
Israeli government finalized its plans
in March but still hasn't ordered the
attack in the meantime the bombing
continues and all the people of Rafa can
do is wait and hope to survive Vinton
Monahan Al jazer for Inside
Story well now let's discuss this with
our guest today kude jeil is in De AB
balad in central Gaza she's an economic
Justice officer at Oxfam whose special
izes in supporting women-led businesses
and youth entrepreneurship in Durham in
the UK Robert gist pinfold a lecturer in
peace and security at Durham University
his research focuses on Israeli foreign
and security policy and Hisham Mahana is
actually in the city of Rafa he's the
spokesman in Gaza for the international
Committee of the Red Cross glad to have
you all uh with us so let me start with
you Hisham you are there in Rafa um and
your organization is the Guardians of
the rules of war the the Geneva
Convention so tell me what does
international humanitarian law say about
the possibility of a large scale
military offensive in a place that's so
packed with
people hello James and thank you for
having me the rules of War are very
clear civilian lives and infrastructure
must be protected no matter what happens
and from what we have been witnessing in
Rafa with the large waves of
displacement that have been ongoing for
months and many families have been on
the move and been displaced for an
average of five times per family now
they fac the emminent um um reality of
uh a military operation Rafa and the
icrc the international Committee of the
Red Cross have warned um the
International Community and parts of the
conflict that any possible scenario of a
massive military operation in raah given
the situation of the
densely populated areas here it will be
nothing but
Carnage and just to be clear for us what
is the noise that we're hearing above
you I'm assuming that's a
[Music]
drone that is correct this is uh what
people in in Rafa and different areas
across the Gaza Strip hear most of the
day cude tell us more about the the life
of ordinary people in Rafa and elsewhere
in Gaza
um you represent Oxfam but I know you
are a mother of a young child yourself
how difficult is things right
now uh thank you for hosting me today
and for this program and thank you for
always giving attention to Gaza because
eyes should always be on Kaza situation
is really devastating the humanitarian
situation is still very difficult no
enough Aid enter Gaza uh despite the
international called from the
organizations and humanitarian
organization to kill up Aid that ENT
Gaza tell the situation is very
devastating uh everyone here is afraid
of of any expected military operation in
Rafa because this for sure will put the
humanitarian situation in a more
difficult situation Rafa is very crowded
of civilians Rafa is really crowded of
tents of makeshift camps where people
are trying to find safe shelter there so
any military offensive on RAF will
really uh make things more difficult we
don't expect to to have a real uh
actually evacuation of civilians from
from RAF but what we really expect that
the humanitarian situation will get more
difficult because we expect uh closure
of Border uh and we only have one line
open which is RA Crossing border and
despite this the aid that enter Gaza is
not enough is not enough to respond to
the needs of those interally displaced
uh PE people and persons here in G strip
and for sure as a mom uh on my personal
level it's really hard whenever we hear
about any expected military operations
in any area not only ra but also in
medal area or any area in the Gaza STP
it's always put us in a situation where
we cannot really find any safety
anywhere Robert is it a case of if there
is a Rafer offensive or when there is a
raffer offensive because prime minister
Netanyahu still talking about total
Victory he says a date's already been
set although he hasn't told us what it
is of
course well this is the question on
everyone's Minds Netanyahu himself has
been talking about raafa offensive for a
very very long time now and nothing is
material realized had you asked me this
a week and a half or two weeks ago I
would have said to you that this is all
basically a bluff that Netanyahu is
trying to use this as talk as leverage
in the talks uh in uh Kata to try and
basically reach an agreement with Hamas
that would see The Return of hostages
and some kind of a temporary or lasting
ceasefire now um the exchange between
Israel and Iran that took place
subsequently is a gamech changer and
leaves this an open question why well
because netanyahu's retaliation Israel's
retali retaliation against that Iranian
attack um was relatively light basically
one anti-aircraft um defense system was
destroyed from what we can tell so far
that was basically um it didn't reach a
threshold to isolate Israel from its
International Partners who've been
arguing against the D escalation the
problem Netanyahu now has is an internal
one having appeased his International
partners he has annoyed the far-right uh
members of his Coalition on whom he's
Reliant for his survival you had
national security minister ital bville
tweeting on X very uh soon after the
attack uh one word that would Loosely
translates to weak or pathetic in Hebrew
so Netanyahu is now Under Pressure to
demonstrate his hawkish credentials and
to appease his Coalition allies so I
think the danger of a Rafa offensive is
now more substantial than we've had for
a very long time in the previous weeks
Hisham your organization the icrc we
mentioned how it governs the laws of war
but it's also itarian organization what
would it mean if an offensive was
carried out in Rafa given that this is I
believe normally about 270,000 people
and now there are about 1.5 million the
place is completely swelled tell us a
bit about the humanitarian situation on
the ground and if I can add a second
part to my question Rafa is very limited
Aid coming into Gaza but is one of the
entry points for Aid that makes it even
worse doesn't it
[Music]
yes absolutely now considering that
there is approximately 1.3 million
people living on 20% only of the total
space of the Gaza Strip totally
disconnected from the the basic Services
uh uh and for example uh 900 people have
only access to one latran and an average
person in Rafa has access to only three
liters of water per day two of them are
not suitable for human consumption and
this is a basic examples of how people
suffer under inhumane conditions as a
result of the ongoing conflict now there
are several challenges that are facing
humanitarian workers including the
international Committee of the Red Cross
which is the lack of uh or absence of uh
security guarantees that are crucial and
necessary for achieving um a meaningful
humanitarian response on the ground
despite all that we are trying to
maximize our humanitarian response
however uh this will not change the
reality on the ground as long as there
are H still is on the ground and and and
they are not seized anytime soon the
situation worsens by the clock by the by
by by the hour and uh uh there is
already a limited space for humanitarian
workers to work now if things escalate
fur than in Rafa Crossing this
humanitarian space will shrink even more
and more making any possible
humanitarian response definitely
meaningless on the ground we are trying
as hard as possible but this is not not
an environment that humanitarians can
work achieve their objectives I I'm
going to move on actually and and ask
cude a follow-up question now um if
there was a raffer offensive where would
the people
go actually uh nowhere and this is the
the question that we hear every day from
anywhere living in Gaza like if there is
any offensive operation and Med
operation in any area in the Gaza strap
where to go and actually people have no
place to go each one of those Gan people
at least at least has been displaced for
at least one or two times through this
war and till this moment we don't have
like s shelters to host those itps in
the Gaza Strip if there is any uh um
expected offensive military operation in
Rafa people will find knowwhere to go
and the situation will is there a
possibility is there a possibility cude
which I've heard some say that people
might be forced out of the Gaza Strip is
that a
possibility we have been hearing about
this since the beginning of the war but
what I think is that people in Gaza will
not actually uh find this solution is
really good for them to leave Gaza
people here have left their house in
North Gaza and in Gaza until this moment
they wait every day in order to listen
about any news or to learn about any
updates and the negotiation that are
have been uh uh uh done in Cur and Egypt
and and everywhere in order to hear
about the possibility to return to their
houses leaving Gaza fory is not easy for
those people actually and if we talk
about being on the edge of the Gaza
Strip and this is the southern point of
the the Gaza Strip Robert um it's on the
edge of Egyptian territory what and of
course Egypt remains um a country with a
peace treaty with Israel what what do
you think Egypt is making of the
prospect of this
offensive well Egypt is very much
against this offens of taking place and
this is exactly why the Biden
Administration is now exerting so much
pressure because they're getting
pressure from their Partners in the Arab
world countries like Egypt and Saudi
Arabia and others for to pressure Israel
to reach a ceasefire as soon as possible
for Egypt as you say there is a border
um issue here as well that Egypt
explicitly has ruled out the resettling
of Palestinians refugees within the
Sinai Peninsula um instead there's been
all sorts of talk about um Israel for
example trying to resettle them
elsewhere but this is a key point of
friction between the Biden
Administration and the Israeli
government Israel maintains from what
we've heard from leaks that um
resettling all of the 1.5 um give or
take civilians within Rafa will take
them around four weeks the US disagrees
vehemently and thinks this will take
around four months and actually doing
something like what Israel proposes this
Mass uh very rapid resettlement to avoid
a humanitarian crisis will actually only
make a humanitarian crisis more likely
and significantly worse because you will
be moving people with that
infrastructure without planning uh
you'll be moving them at a very very um
uh very planned way and as some of my
colleagues here have mentioned these are
people who' have been uprooted on
multiple occasions so all of those risks
of famine and disease would actually be
exacerbated by a rapid unplanned
evacuation so pick up on that point if
you can Hisham I mean legally under
International humanitarian law is there
a way Israel could do this or does it
amount to force displacement which is in
itself International uh illegal under
International
[Music]
well this is entirely our responsibility
on party to the conflict and Israel as
an occupying power in Gaza must ensure
the protection of civilians and they
have absolute access to everything
necessary for their own Survival
including food water hygiene and health
care and in terms of displacement people
must be assured that they can be moved
safely from one area to another that
families one family cannot or does not
get separated from their beloved ones
and it has to be timely bound that they
cannot be displaced forever uh um it's
now more important than ever that the
International Community must be held of
our responsibilities to exert more
pressure to put this Bloodshed to an end
and uh um there's no way that people in
Gaza can continue living like this it
has been almost 200 days now and they
have been through a lot
cude um we've got lots of comments from
members of the International Community
who are telling Israel not to carry out
a Rafa operation the un uh Secretary
General said an operation in Rafa would
compound the humanitarian catastrophe
the US Secretary of State Tony blinkin
said there would be terrible
consequences for civilians how seriously
do people there in Gaza take these
comments from these International
figures when the war now is coming up to
its seventh month and yes you've got uh
the US warning of this but at the same
time the us giving $26 billion do in the
last few days to
Israel people people in Gaza actually uh
fed up uh listening to uh other to to
the external roles
declarations and comments on social
media about any expected military
operation in Rafa because what do they
really suffer is the reality the reality
is that the devastating humanitarian
situation infrastructure is damaged
houses buildings is Dam are damaged no
access to clean water to drink no access
to domestic water toast no access to
enough food the health system is really
collapsed so people are living in tent
now we are in summer so people are are
are being bured actually inside those
tents so people are
only thinking about the reality about
what they are suffering from they try to
to hear some news uh between times and
other and another but they actually fear
they actually fear any expected military
operation because as you have mentioned
they don't have any place to go they
have no world there is no safe shelters
in Gaza even in maasi even in place no
place in Gaza is safe because people
have already experiences with uh being
displaced from one place to another
place Robert um we've heard tough words
from the Biden Administration before
towards the Netanyahu government and
Netanyahu really hasn't listened on many
occasions but it is worth noting there
is another development in the last few
hours it looks like the US Secretary of
State Anon blinkin is going to sanction
under what's known as the lehy laws um
one particular unit of the Israeli
military do you think that will get
Israel's attention it's not related to
the to the possibility of a of a of uh
offensive and Rafa but do you think it
could become
linked yeah just to give uh some context
for your viewers what we're talking
about here is the netak Yehuda Battalion
now this was a pioneering Battalion set
up by the IDF leadership because it
specifically seeks to integrate um
strictly Orthodox or Ultra Orthodox
Israeli into the army many of whom
wouldn't normally serve in the military
so it's a strictly religious Unit H now
the problem here is that this unit has
been subject to um significant uh and
building allegations of Human Rights
abuses long before the current military
campaign including the death of a 17 a
78-year-old Palestinian American in 2022
who was basically um abducted by the
group and left to die uh so the Israeli
government will say look there's no
truth to these allegations but we do
know that that Battalion was moved out
of the West Bank and onto the quieter
Goan Heights border uh whether there's a
connection there is very much an open
question but it is now fighting in the
Gaza Strip and is part of the military
operations at the moment will this um
affect Israel's military behavior in its
campaign no we're talking about 1,000
people here this is not a significant uh
sanction but Israel's leaders are indeed
insens by this they argue it's the thin
end of a wedge and who knows what this
opens up and it is indeed
a new precedent so on the one hand you
have Biden is basically trying to use
carrot and stick here on the one hand
you have that $26 billion Aid package uh
that was used to uh support Israel and
show us support for Israel on the other
hand you have new precedents like the
sanctioning of members of the IDF so is
this an act in itself that will be a
game changer no but is it the start of
increased US public pressure against
Israel I'd argue yes Hisham let me take
you back to where you are where we're
talking about um that overcrowded city
of Rafa um now one of the things we've
seen in over six months is the collapse
of the medical system uh across the Gaza
Strip and we saw that hospitals were
deliberately targeted by Israel al
shifer in Gaza City NASA Hospital in
carun the most well-known but so many
hospitals uh targeted um how worried are
you about the hospitals where you are in
Rafa if they were to to to to face this
the same thing because they seem to be
among the only functioning medical
facilities in the whole Gaza Strip now
the interational committee of the Red
Cross have warned since the start the
early stage of this conflict about
impacting the healthc care system in
Gaza which has been um heavily impacted
by 16 years long of um restrictions on
the movement of people and good and um
after hospitals have come to Rubble
following the military operations
conducted inside these hospitals and
around them uh it leaves only the entire
Healthcare System in Gaza now is
collapsed and there's only one hospital
that is capable of providing Advanced
healthc Care Service and that is the
Gaza European Hospital in the governor
of kanun where a surgical team of the
icrc doctors and nurses and surgeons
work since last November and deliver or
perform an average of 20 uh urgently
needed surgeries on daily basis the icrc
it's at its most uh um priority to keep
providing support to whatever is left
from the healthc care system in Gaza
Strip but there is no Health entity can
can absorb the influx of patients either
in Rafa or in hunas and if the scenario
of a military operation is conducted
hospitals have been reeling and doctors
have been working um nonstop for 6
months the entire Healthcare System in
Gaza or whatever is left of it is on its
knees doctors themselves and medical
staff have either been killed uh
detained or lost um um a dear friend or
or something that is uh valuable in
their lives yet they continue to work
however they cannot continue working
like this
forever I mean cude let me show our
viewers something that I think uh
demonstrates this uh these are pictures
of a young baby in Rafa um the baby was
saved from the womb of her mother um who
was dying from head injuries and an
emergency cesarian section was performed
form Med in Rafa the woman died as did
her husband as did um their
three-year-old other uh daughter um it
just shows the appalling situation
facing um women and children in Gaza
does it not a shocking statistic I saw
from UNICEF every 10 minutes one child
is killed or injured in
Gaza we have uh we have actually a
million of such a tragedy stories in in
the G of trap and always and like in
like any conflict around the world women
and children always pay the highest
price and during this War uh very big
number of women and children were killed
actually uh with no uh actually with no
limited uh danger and risky things the
children all the time they are at risk
they are at danger they are fear they
are they shout whenever they hear any
pump or shelling around them for my son
for example all the time I'm trying to
keep him calm trying to convince him
that there is nothing risky around us
but the reality is that our
children couldn't actually grow up in an
environment like this children needs to
grow up in a protective environment
safety environment and the story of that
uh baby actually in in Rafa is one of
million of stories that happen in G TR
during this escalation and it it was
really tragedy seeing that how life is
born out of death and it's really
difficult to see and to think about how
would the future of this baby will be
without his mother his father siblings
and with this really tragedy story
staying with you kude and not as an
official from Oxfam but as a mother what
would be your message to leaders around
the world who have power here uh what
would be your message to to the Israeli
leaders at this moment as they
contemplate a full-on offensive into
Rafa my me my message is really
uh having any military operation in Rafa
will will actually put civilians in a
very uh devastating
situation uh civilians should be
protected that's why I call on my on a
personal level as a mom I call for an
immediate permanent ceasefire because
every minute pass in Casa we lose we
lose people we lose our beloved ones we
lose our family members we lose our
friends colleagues and everyone we know
in Kaza so an immediate permanent ceas
fire for sure will end this because this
actually should end this fear this law
should be end in Gaza
now okay thank you very much to our
three guests today kud Jil Rob gist
pinfold and hishan Mahana you'll find
comprehensive coverage of the war on
Gaza from our team's base there
including in Rafa itself and there's
more context and Analysis on our mobile
app and on our website al.com if you
have comments on today's discussion go
to our Facebook page P that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory or find us
on X we are at AJ insid story from me
James Bay and the team here in Doha
please stay safe bye-bye for now
[Music]